# Getting and Cleanin Data Course Project Code Book

This file describes the variables, the data, and transformations performed to clean up the source data and generate the target data required in this project.

## Overview

This project aimed to get data generated by a research on Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data, clean this data according to the requirements stated below and generate an output dataset containing the average of measures that represent mean and standard deviation variables in the source data.

Information about this research can be obtained at: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

## Source Data

The source data of this project can be obtained at http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/00240/UCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

Information about the source data set can be obtained at http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/00240/UCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

The source data comes in zip compact format and in order to be used, it was extracted to the working directory. It is very important to set the variable rootFolder with the path where the zip file was extracted. Without this, the script won't work properly.
The following files were used in this project:
* activity_labels.txt: contains the names of the activities performed by the subjects of the research and the IDs of these names
* features.txt: contains the names of the variables obtained in the observations of the research and their IDs
* /train/X_train.txt: contains the measures obtained by the training group
* /train/y_train.txt: contains the IDs of the activities performed during training activities
* /train/subject_train.txt: contains the IDs of the subjects that performed training activities</BR>
The last three files have the same number of lines since each observation refers to an activity performed by a subject
* /test/X_test.txt
* /test/y_test.txt
* /test/subject_test.txt</BR>
The three files above are analog to the three training files, but they refer to test data.

## Merging Training and Test Data (Requirement 1)
The merging of training and test data was done considering the order of the reading of the source files. First, all three (measures, activities IDs and subjects IDs) training data were read and each stored in a data frame. After that, all three test data were read and appended to the corresponding data frame.
* Measures were stored in a data frame called activitiesData;
* Activities IDs were stored in a data frame called activitiesCodes
* Subjects IDS were stored in a data frame called activitiesSubjects
These three data sets had the same number of rows.
This actions were performed from line 20 to 89

## Appropriately label the data set with descriptive variable names (Requirement 4)
Each column on data source corresponds to a variable described on activity_labels.txt file. The names of the variables were set by using colnames function. Lines 92 to 102 executed this part of the naming.
Later on the script (lines 140 to 147) unwanted characters, like (, ) and - were removed from the variable names.


## Extraction of the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement (Requirement2)
The function grep on 'mean' and 'std' variable names was used to select the required variables from activitiesData data frame. This subset was stored in a data frame called targetActivitiesData. Lines from 105 to 116 of the script performed this operation.

## Use descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set (Requirement 3)
In order to fulfill this requirement it was necessary to match activities IDs and activity labels. Activity labels were read on data frame out of the activity_labels.txt file. Then the labels were stored in a vector. The activities IDs were used as the vector index in order to generate a vector of the activities labels named as activityLabel. This vector was then inserted as the first column of targetActivitiesData data frame. Lines from 124 to 135 perform this operation.

## From the data set generated by requirement 4, create a independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject
First step to accomplish this task was to bind activitiesSubjects and targetActivitiesData data frames. With this, we obtained a data frame containing the subjects IDs, the activities and all mean and standard deviation measures. Then, package dplyr was used to group this data frame by subject ID and activity (line 160). Next step was to summarize each of the variables by the groups. This was accomplished with summarise_each() function from dplys package (line 165). The result was stored in the meansBySubjectActivity data frame. At last the variable names of the measures were updated to start with the 'meanOf_' string in order to properly name them, since the values now represent the mean of the original measures. Finally, the file MeasuresMeansBySubjectAndActivity.txt was created with the content of the meansBySubjectActivity data frame.
